Usability
---------

Our biggest problem with usability, even in the late stages of development, was that
players had a hard time grasping the game mechanic and lose/win conditions. When we
started usability tests, the end screen still looked something like this:

IMAGE OF OLD LOSE SCREEN HERE

It was pretty boring, more or less just a featureless readout of stats from the game
you just played. People knew exact statistics, but had no point of reference to know
how well they were doing. We brainstormed for an afternoon and came up with the
(in my opinion) much better final version, which includes a trophy system and
gives the characters some personality.

IMAGE OF NEW END SCREEN

If we were making a game like Mario (ie a platformer) or like Zelda (ie a dungeon-explorer),
new players would have to cross a much shorter gap to understanding how the mechanic
works. Heads Up isn't really a game "like" any other as far as I know, and this means
that we had to be very careful about how we introduced the mechanic to a new player.

Early on, seeing new players approach the game was depressing. Once we stopped telling
people how the game worked, they often couldn't figure it out on their own. At that
stage, the hot dogs didn't turn red, had no numeric counter, and point numbers didn't
flash above people's heads. People would say things like "how do you make him eat it"
and "why did it end? did I lose?". Generally, players did not understand what our game
was about.

I sort of spoiled it above, but we solved this to our satisfaction by adding a few key
visual cues that explained without words how the mechanic worked. After adding these
and constantly user-testing the new ideas, we eventually got things to a point where
players could pick up and play with absolutely no prior knowledge - certainly a good
thing for an iPhone game.

One thing I still think could be improved with respect to usability is the lack of a
visual cue for multi-dog heads. Players always ask if they get extra points for
multiple dogs on a head, and I think they shouldn't have to.
